# Accessibility and the Election Tech Initiative

The principal software endeavor of ETI to date has been the ElectionGuard software development kit (SDK) that enables election vendors to implement end-to-end verifiability in their voting systems. From an accessibility perspective, end-to-end verifiability is an important technology because it is the only recognized way any non-paper-based voting system will be able to demonstrate software independence, a critical capability needed for next-generation voting systems to be certified by the Election Assistance Commission. ElectionGuard works with paper-based systems, but paper-based systems present difficulties for a wide swath of voters. ElectionGuard will enable multiple types of voting systems to be deployed and certified under these 2.0 guidelines.

Beyond ElectionGuard, though, ETI plans to provide  open-source software tools that demonstrate universal design principles and benefits. Because of the way the Help America Vote Act was written, “accessible” devices were required, and thus limited to, a single system per voting precinct. Accessibility works best when everyone benefits, as we do with curb cuts, ramps, and more. From a voting perspective, that means all in-person and remote voters should have accessible options available by default, not special request. True voting independence is made much more difficult if limited to paper-based systems, whether in-person or remote.

ETI started its accessibility innovation in 2019 at the Aspen Security Conference. We paired the Center for Civic Design’s Anywhere Ballot (we worked with them to implement the Anywhere Ballot for modern web browsers) with the Xbox Adaptive Controller to control the voting interface. By doing so, voters with different affordances could connect to the device via an input jack to control voting navigation using their preferred method.

This year, ETI is partnering with Enhanced Voting to develop a ballot reader for low-vision voters in every precinct in Georgia that want to verify their ballot is printed as they intend. It will be based on “consumer off the shelf” (COTS) products based on the next-generation Microsoft Adaptive Accessories (the evolution of the Xbox Adaptive Controller).

We see this effort as forming the basis of a generic voting experience election system vendors or administrators could adapt to their products or adopt in full. In addition to input jacks, Bluetooth support is possible as well for systems such as power wheelchairs to integrate with and control ballot navigation using the same mechanisms they use to navigate their chairs (this technique is explicitly supported in the same next-generation voting system standards).

This voting interface is intended to be universal and used across different voting methods. It can be used for in-person voting systems either as a ballot-marking device, a ballot-reading device, or a secure, next-generation voting device that supports software independence, a key limitation of “direct response electronic” systems in use today. Because we’re enabling ElectionGuard encryption in modern web browsers, we can encompass remote and portable voting experiences in the same accessible interface under a similar security and transparency umbrella (remote voting on devices not under election administrator control will require additional security and identity capability outside of ElectionGuard, it should be noted).

